Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we will configure OSPF in the
same network as last time, using the new configurations
we learned in the lecture video.
For the purpose of this video I have already
completed steps 1 and 2, which involves configuring
host names and IP addresses.
It’s good to get some repetitive practice
with the basics, but to keep the length of
this video a little shorter I won’t show
these steps in the video.
So, let’s get right into step 3.
We are told to enable OSPF directly on each
interface of the routers.
That means we won’t be using the NETWORK
command to enable OSPF on interfaces with
an IP address that falls in the specified
range.
Instead we will specify exactly which interfaces
to enable OSPF on, directly on the interfaces.
I’ll start on R1.
ENABLE CONF T. I’ll use the INTERFACE RANGE
command to configure the interfaces all at
once.
Note that there is no need to enable OSPF
on G3/0, the other routers don’t need to
know about the 203.0.113.0/30 network, as
I explained in the Day 26 lab video.
So, INTERFACE RANGE G0/0, F1/0, L0.
Notice how I enter the INTERFACE RANGE command.
If configuring a range like G0/0, G0/1, G0/2,
G0/3, for example, you can use the command
INTERFACE RANGE G0/0 – 3, with a hyphen.
However, in cases like this with three different
types of interface, FastEthernet, Gigabit
Ethernet, and Loopback, you can use a comma
in between each to configure them all at once.
Now let’s enable OSPF.
IP OSPF 1, that’s the process-ID, AREA 0.
And that’s it.
Let’s confirm.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
So, in the lecture video I showed you that
the ‘Routing for Networks’ section is
empty and instead the interfaces are displayed
under ‘Routing on Interfaces Configured
Explicitly’.
However, that doesn’t display in Packet
Tracer.
As I’ve said before, Packet Tracer is a
great, free tool for the CCNA, but it’s
not perfect.
This is just a small thing, but I just wanted
to point it out.
Now let’s configure Loopback0 as a passive
interface.
To do so, we have to go into OSPF configuration
mode.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
I showed you the PASSIVE-INTERFACE DEFAULT
command in the lecture, but we’re just configuring
a single interface so I’ll use the regular
method.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Okay, now I’ll just run through the configurations
on the other routers.
R2 next.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE RANGE G0/0, F1/0, L0.
IP OSPF 1 AREA 0.
Then configure the passive interface.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Next up, R3.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE RANGE F1/0, F2/0, L0.
IP OSPF 1 AREA 0.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Finally, R4.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE RANGE G0/0, F1/0, F2/0,
L0.
IP OSPF 1 AREA 0.
Here on R4 I’ll try out the PASSIVE-INTERFACE
DEFAULT command, and then remove it from F1/0
and F2/0.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE DEFAULT.
Notice the message saying the neighbor has
changed to the DOWN state.
OSPF can’t make any OSPF neighbors via a
passive interface, so the neighbor goes down
immediately.
Okay, let’s enable OSPF again on F1/0 and
F2/0.
NO PASSIVE-INTERFACE F1/0.
NO PASSIVE-INTERFACE F2/0.
Let’s see if only G0/0 and L0 are passive
interfaces.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
Indeed they are.
If the router had any other network interfaces,
they would appear here as well, however this
router only has G0/0, F1/0, F2/0, and the
loopback interface I created.
Now let’s check R4’s OSPF neighbors.
DO SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
Looks good, R4 is neighbors with R2 and R3.
Notice the dead time.
If I keep repeating this command over and
over again, you should be able to see that
the dead time counts down to 30 and then resets,
because a Hello message is received every
10 seconds.
Okay, that’s all for step 3, let’s do
step 4.
Configure the reference bandwidth on each
router so a fastethernet interface has a cost
of 100.
I hope you can complete this step, this sounds
like something that could appear on the exam.
Let’s check out the command.
AUTO-COST REFERENCE-BANDWIDTH, and let’s
use the question mark.
So, remember that this command is entered
in megabits per second.
So, how can we make it so a fastethernet interface
has a cost of 100?
Well, a fastethernet interface has a bandwidth
of 100 megabits per second by default.
The formula for OSPF cost is reference bandwidth
divided by interface bandwidth equals cost.
So, what divided by 100 equals 100?
The answer is 10,000.
So, enter 10,000 as the reference bandwidth,
and let’s check.
DO SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE.
In the lecture I showed you the SHOW IP OSPF
INTERFACE BRIEF command, but it’s not available
in Packet Tracer.
So, here’s FastEthernet1/0, and notice the
cost of 100.
If a fastethernet interface has a cost of
100, then what will the cost of G0/0 be?
Scroll up, and here it is, 10.
So, a 10-gig interface, or anything faster
than that, will have a cost of 1.
Okay, let’s configure that on the other
routers.
Remember that it’s always a good idea to
configure the same reference bandwidth on
each router.
R3 next.
AUTO-COST REFERENCE-BANDWIDTH 10000.
Then R2.
Finally, R1.
AUTO-COST REFERENCE-BANDWIDTH 10000.
Next up we’ll configure a default route
on R1 and advertise it to the other OSPF routers.
Since I’m in OSPF config mode, let’s configure
R1 to advertise it first, even though it doesn’t
have a default route yet.
DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE.
Now let’s configure the route.
EXIT.
IP ROUTE 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0, and then the Internet
Service Provider Router’s IP address will
be the next hop, 203.0.113.2.
Now I’m going to go on R4 to check which
default route or routes it added.
In the day 26 lab video it added routes via
both R2 and R3, even though the route via
R2 has a faster gigabit ethernet connection,
so it is the better route.
Now that we have changed the OSPF reference
bandwidth, fastethernet and gigabit ethernet
interfaces have a different cost.
So, what default route or routes will be added
by R4, and what will their cost be?
Let’s check.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
So, what I’m going to explain now is a more
advanced OSPF topic.
You don’t need to remember it for the CCNA.
But I want to give a brief explanation in
case some of you notice this and think OSPF
is behaving strangely.
First off, notice that R4 added the route
via R2 to the route table.
You might think that’s correct, because
we changed the reference bandwidth so that
fastethernet and gigabit ethernet interfaces
have a different cost.
That means the route via R2 is preferred over
R3.
However, this is actually another error in
Packet Tracer.
BOTH routes, via R2 and via R3, should be
added.
Why is that?
Well, look at the cost of this route via R2.
The cost is 1.
With the reference bandwidth we just configured,
the cost to reach R2 should be 100, plus 10
for R2 to reach R1, so 110 just to get to
R1.
Why is the cost of this default route 1?
The answer is here, this ‘E2’ beside the
route.
If you look up at the top here for the meaning
of E2, it says ‘OSPF external type 2’.
As I said, this is a CCNP-level topic, so
you don’t need to learn it right now.
But basically the ‘external type 2’ means
that the ‘internal’ OSPF metric to reach
R1 is ignored.
So, actually the cost via both R2 and R3 will
be the same, 1.
To prove that, I’ll shut down R4’s F1/0
interface so the OSPF adjacency with R2 goes down
INTERFACE F1/0.
SHUTDOWN.
We get a message saying the neighbor has gone
from FULL to DOWN.
I’ll click this button to skip forward 30
seconds to make sure R4 has updated the routing
table.
And let’s check.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
See, now the route via R3, 10.0.34.1, is added,
and it also has a cost of 1.
So, for some reason Packet Tracer does not
insert both routes at the same time.
Perhaps Packet Tracer’s logic is considering
the internal OSPF metric to reach R1 even
though it shouldn’t, but if you try this
in GNS3 or on real equipment you’ll see
that both routes are added to the routing
table.
Anyway, like I said this is a CCNP topic,
don’t worry about learning it yet.
I won’t cover this topic in my CCNA course
so if you do want to learn more, try a Google
search for ‘OSPF external metric’.
Finally, let’s go into simulation mode and
take a look at an OSPF Hello message.
Let’s check out this one.
Look at the Layer 3 destination, 224.0.0.5.
Do you remember that IP address?
That’s the multicast address used to reach
all OSPF routers on the link, and it’s the
IP address that routers send OSPF hello messages
to.
Now, if you click on the ‘PDU Details’
up here, you can see the different fields
in the frame.
There’s the Ethernet frame, the IP packet,
and inside is the OSPF Hello message.
I won’t go into any details, but let’s
look at some of the fields of the OSPF Hello
message.
First notice that the version number is 2.
As I said before, this is the version that
is usually used for IPv4.
Next to that, Type 1.
What’s that?
Well, it means this is a ‘Type 1’ OSPF
message, a Hello message.
Remember, Hello is type 1, DBD is Type 2,
etc.
Under you can see the Router ID, and notice
the Area ID is written as 0.0.0.0.
Well, OSPF Areas are a 32-bit number, like
an IPv4 address, and can be written in dotted
decimal like this.
So, Area 0 can be written as 0.0.0.0.
Going down a bit, you can see the network
mask, the default Hello and Dead timers of
10 and 40 seconds, DR and BDR addresses, and
the neighbor’s address.
Okay, just wanted to point out a few fields.
Actually, one more field.
Look here at the ‘pro’, protocol field
of the IP header.
0x59, what does that mean?
Didn’t I say that OSPF messages have a protocol
number of 89?
Well, 0x59 means hexadecimal 5 9, which is
actually equal to 89 in decimal, indicating
an OSPF message is encapsulated in the IP
header.
Okay, so in this lab we configured OSPF in
a different way than the last lab, changed
the reference bandwidth, advertised a default
route, and took a brief look at some fields
of the OSPF Hello message.
That’s all for this lab.
Now let’s take a look at a lab in Boson
NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim lab preview
I have selected OSPF 2.
So you can pause the video if you want to
read the objective and get an idea of the
scenario.
But basically there is a new router that has
been added to the network, 'Key West', and
we have to configure OSPF here, and also troubleshoot
OSPF elsewhere in the network.
These are the commands you need to know, you
already know all of these commands, so that
shouldn't be a problem.
And the IP addresses on each device.
Okay, now let's look at the lab tasks.
There are three main tasks.
Task 1, examine the initial network configuration.
Task 2, examine the remainder of the topology.
And task 3, verify network connectivity.
So, for today's lab preview let's just do
task 1.
So once again, you can pause the video here
if you want to read about the scenario, but
I'll get right into step A, part 1.
Log on to the Key West router.
Okay, so I'll click on the Key West router
here, console.
Now I'm in the CLI.
Notice it says right here, all passwords have
been set to cisco.
So first we have to log in to the device,
cisco.
And then enable, and once again enter the
enable password, cisco.
Okay, what command should you issue to display
the routing table on Key West?
That's easy, SHOW IP ROUTE.
Examine the output of this command.
What conclusion can you draw regarding the
operation of the OSPF routing protocol on
Key West?
Okay, so if OSPF is running, it doesn't seem
to be configured correctly because it isn't
receiving any OSPF routes from neighbors.
Okay, part B, examine the configuration.
What command should you issue to display the
currently executing configuration on Key West?
So, the currently executing configuration,
that is the running config.
So the command is SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG.
So let's check for any OSPF configuration,
here it is.  Router OSPF 1.
There is the router ID, and one NETWORK command.
Okay, step 2.
Review the information you have gathered so
far.
Is the OSPF routing protocol running on Key
West?
How did you determine this?
Well, yes it is running.
As you can see here, there is some OSPF configuration,
and if I do SHOW IP PROTOCOLS, yes you can
see OSPF is indeed running.
Okay, step 3.
If OSPF is running on Key West, what would
prevent OSPF from detecting the other networks
in the topology?
Okay, so I did notice something that could
be a problem, this NETWORK command.
0.0.0.0, that's /32 so it matches only 200.120.45.0.
Only that one single address, which I believe
is not on any of Key West's interfaces.
Let's see, SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
And indeed it isn't.
So this network command does not activate
OSPF on any of the interfaces.
Okay step 4, in order for OSPF to send and
receive updates from its neighbors the appropriate
router interfaces must be configured for OSPF.
Examine the configuration and determine whether
this has been done.
What command is missing or configured incorrectly?
Okay, so I just answered that.
The NETWORK command is configured incorrectly.
Okay, step C, or part C, step 1.
Examine the information that you have gathered
so far.
Briefly explain the main problem and how you
plan to correct the configuration error you
have found.
Okay, so I just explained that, the incorrect
wildcard mask here.
So, in order to enable OSPF on these interfaces
let's configure the network command with a
/24 mask, so NETWORK 200.120.45.0 and then
a /24 mask, that's nice and simple.
CONF T. ROUTER OSPF 1.
First I will remove the incorrect command,
DO SHOW RUN, PIPE (|), and then here's a convenient
way to filter the output, SECTION OSPF.
So now I only see the OSPF configurations
in the running config.
NO NETWORK 200.120.45.0, AREA 0.
Okay, now let's configure a new network command.
NETWORK 200.120.45.0 and a /24 wildcard mask
is 0.0.0.255 AREA 0.
Okay, so I corrected the configuration error.
Then part D is 'verify OSPF behavior'.
After you correct the configuration error
you have discovered, reexamine the routing
table on Key West.
What change do you observe?
So, I'll get out of OSPF config mode with
END.
SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, I do not notice any changes.
Oh, looks like a neighbor just came up, let's
see.
Okay, no routes yet.
I'll just check a few more times.
Sometimes it can take a little time for the
routes to enter the routing table.
There they are.
Okay, looks like the Key West router has formed
an OSPF adjacency with, which router was it?
With the Miami router.
Let's see.
SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
Indeed, .246, here it is, .246 Miami.
Okay, so it formed the OSPF neighbor relationship,
the OSPF adjacency, and now it is receiving
OSPF routes from the Miami router.
Okay, so if you want to try the other steps
in this lab make sure to get a copy of Boson
NetSim for yourself.
I highly recommend it.
If you want to get a copy, follow the link
in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Recently I’ve noticed an increase in the
number of channel members, and I’m so thankful
to all of you, both JCNA and JCNP-level members.
Previously I read out the names of all the
JCNP-level members one by one, but the list
is getting longer so I’ll just leave the
list up here.
Your support helps me keep making and releasing
these videos every week, I’m really grateful
for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, August 15th
2020, if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll be
in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.